1. Briefly defined, music is the rational organization of sounds and silences passing through time. Tones must be arranged in some consistent, logical, and (usually) pleasing way before we can call these sounds “music” instead of just noise.

2.A singer or an instrumentalist generates music literally by disturbing the environment, by creating vibrations that travel through the air as sound waves.

3.Sound waves radiate out in a circle from their source, carrying with them two types of essential information: pitch and loudness.

4.The speed of vibration within the sound wave determines what we perceive as high and low pitches; and the width (or amplitude) of the wave reflects it volume. 

5.We tend to hear low, slow tones as relaxing, and high, rapid ones as tension filled. If the sound waves contain strong, regular pulses, we might start to tap our foot or move in synch with the pulse or beat—the groove.

6.In digital recording all the components of musical sound—pitch, tone color, duration, volume, and more—are analyzed thousands of times per second, and that information is instantly stored as sequences of binary numbers. With equal speed this digital data can be reconverted to electrical impulses that are then changed back into analog sound that is amplified by speakers or earphones.

7.Most processing of sounds (music as well as language) take place in the temporal lobe.

8.If we are imagining how the next line of a song will go, that decision is usually reached in the frontal lobe. 

9.If we are playing an instrument, we engage the motor center (parietal lobe) to move our fingers and the visual center (occipital lobe) to read the notes. 

10.How music makes us feel—happy or sad, energetic or relaxed—is determined partly by another part of the brain, the amygdala, and by other factors as well. 

11.Although scientists are uncertain exactly how and where all musical data are stored, we know that music and memory are tightly linked. The songs we best remember are those from our adolescence, when hormonal changes caused sonic information to be engraved in our brain forever.

12.Most of the music discussed in this book what we call “classical” music, sometimes referred to as “art” music because a particular set of skills is needed to perform and appreciate it. 

13.We refer to clothes, furniture, and cars as “classic” because they have timeless qualities of expression, proportion, and balance. So, too, we give the name “classical” to music with these same qualities, music that has endured the test of time.

14. Classical music relies on acoustic instruments (whose sounds are not electronically altered), such as the trumpet, violin, and piano. Popular music often uses mechanically enhanced sounds such as those produced by electrically amplified guitars and basses, electronic synthesizers, and computers.

15. Classical music relies greatly on preset written music, or musical notation, and so the work (a symphony, for example) is to some extent a “fixed entity”, which will always be performed more or less the same way. Popular music relies more on oral and aural transmission, and the work can change greatly from one performance to the next; never do we see performers reading written music at a pop concert.

16. Classical music is primarily, but by no means exclusively, instrumental, with meaning communicated abstractly through sound. Almost all popular music is vocal and makes use of a text, called the lyrics, from which the listener extracts the meaning of the music.

17.In classical music, the rhythmic “beat” often rests beneath the surface. Popular music foregrounds a recurring, heavy beat.

18.Popular music exists in the real world, its lyrics embracing such issues of contemporary life as love and rejection, racism and social inequality.

